Mixpanel alternatives (#6836)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/best-mixpanel-alternatives.md

As of July 2023, **PostHog** is deployed by 2,365 (0.2%) of the top 1 million websites in 2023, up +327% from 554 the previous year. **Mixpanel** is deployed by 5,218 (0.5%), down -17% from 6,295 the previous year.

### Why do companies use PostHog?

According to [reviews on G2](https://www.g2.com/products/posthog/reviews), companies use PostHog because:

1. **It replaces multiple tools:** PostHog can replace Mixpanel (product analytics), LaunchDarkly (feature flags and A/B testing), and Hotjar (session replay and surveys). This simplifies workflows and ensures all their data is in one place.

2. **Pricing is transparent and scalable:** Reviewers appreciate how PostHog's pricing scales as they grow. There's a [generous free tier](/pricing). Companies eligible for [PostHog for Startups](/startups) also get $50k in additional free credits.

3. **They need a complete picture of users:** PostHog includes every tool necessary to understand users and improve products. This means creating funnels to track conversion, watching replays to see where users get stuck, testing solutions with A/B tests, and gathering feedback with user surveys.

> ### Bottom line 
>

> > PostHog is the best Mixpanel alternative for startups and mid-size companies. It replaces Mixpanel and numerous other tools, saving money and time. Power user features, like an SQL insight builder and console logs, make it a good choice for engineering-led teams, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> PostHog is the best Mixpanel alternative for startups and mid-size companies. It replaces Mixpanel and numerous other tools, saving money and time. Power user features, like an SQL insight builder and session replay logs, make it a good choice for engineering-led teams, too.
```
It is a bit unclear what "console logs" means here without some context.

## Google Analytics 4 (GA4)

> ![GA4](../images/blog/mixpanel-alternatives/google-website.png)

Reviewer: This screenshot made me chuckle

Author: Haha, yes. I liked your website screenshots in the vs you wrote. Figured I'd let their marketing do the talking ;)

### What is Google Analytics 4?

Google Analytics 4 (GA4) is a marketing and product analytics tool that's tightly integrated with other Google products, such as Ads, BigQuery, Looker Studio, and Firebase. 

Unlike its predecessor, Universal Analytics (GA3), it's event-based. It also introduces new report types, such as conversion funnels and retention tables. This makes it more useful to product teams than before.

### Key features

- 🤖 **Predictive insights** alert you to trends you're not aware of, like an increase in traffic to a specific landing page, or an anomalous decline in conversion from one period to another.

- 🔁 **Integration with Google tools** means it's easy to analyze your GA4 data elsewhere, such as Google's dashboarding tool, Looker Studio.

- ⌨️ **Natural language search** means you can ask specific questions, like "MoM growth in users on iOS", rather searching existing reports.

### Who uses GA4?

> Typical GA4 users are:

Reviewer: heavier ecommerce usage too?

 <td>Track ROI on Google marketing campaigns</td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><strong>Predictive insights</strong></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
 <td>AI-powered alerts when metrics chanage</td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><strong>Natural language insights</strong></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
 <td>Fetch insights using natural language queries</td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><strong>Group analytics</strong></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td>Track metrics at account or company level</td>
 </tr>
 <tr>
 <td><strong>Realtime dashboards</strong></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td> 
 <td>Track website activity in real time</td>
 </tr> 
 <tr>

>  <td><strong>Data governance</strong></td>

Reviewer: GA has this too? Kind of: https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/9305587?hl=en#zippy=%2Cgoogle-analytics

Author: I think that's more akin to user permissions. With data governance, an admin can approve or block new incoming events – e.g. in Mixpanel, if a new event is ingested, the admin gets notified and decide if it appears in the UI, add descriptions / tags etc.

 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td>Admin level control over event approval, tags and descriptions</td>

>  </tr> 

Reviewer: Transparent pricing as another field here? Mixpanel yes, GA4 no?

> ### Bottom line
>
> GA4 is the best Mixpanel alternative for marketing teams who want to track ROI on campaigns, and a good option for B2C and e-commerce platforms. Product teams, especially those working on B2B products, should look elsewhere.

## Amplitude

![amplitude](../images/blog/mixpanel-alternatives/amplitude-website.png)

### What is Amplitude?

Amplitude is an analytics and testing tool with a particular focus on large enterprise customers, like Ford, NBCUniversal, and Walmart. 

### Key features

- 📈 **Product analytics**, including funnel and retention analysis, user paths, behavioral cohorts, custom dashboards, and more.

- 🧪 **A/B testing** with support for JSON payloads, primary, secondary, and counter metrics.

- 💁‍♂️ **Customer data platform** that combines analytics data with third-party tools for data governance, identity resolution, and data federation.

- 🤖 **AI insight builder** that generates insights based on natural language requests, like "What is my purchase conversion rate?".

### Who uses Amplitude?

Typical Amplitude users are:

- Non-technical product managers
- Data teams at large enterprises
- Growth engineering and marketing teams

> 

Reviewer: Companies with heavy regulatory requirements like banking and healthcare (at least that what it seems like from their page).

 </tr> 
 <tr>
 <td><strong>Data governance</strong></td>
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td> 
 <td>Admin level control over event approval, tags and descriptions</td>
 </tr> 
 </tbody>
</table>
</div>

![amplitude](../images/blog/mixpanel-alternatives/ammplitude.png)

### Why do companies use Amplitude?

1. **Reducing load on data teams:** Amplitude is designed to enable non-technical to self-serve analytics. Amplitude [cites](https://amplitude.com/case-studies/nbc) NBCUniversal as a company that's benefited from its data team spending less time responding to requests for analysis.

2. **Large-scale experimentation:** Unlike Mixpanel, Amplitude offers a built-in experimentation add-on. This enables companies to run experiments on users using existing cohorts created in Amplitude.

3. **Resolving data quality problems:** Companies that use Amplitude, particularly large ones, often migrate from outdated, or self-built, tools that generate poor quality data. Amplitude helps them fix that, while also making analytics more accessible.

> ### How popular is Amplitude?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### How popular is Amplitude?
```

## Heap

![heap](../images/blog/mixpanel-alternatives/heap-website.png)

### What is Heap?

Heap describes itself as a Digital Insights Platform. Unpacking that a bit, it means Heap offers both product analytics and session replay, and supports marketing use cases with multitouch attribution.

Heap was [acquired in September 2023](https://contentsquare.com/heap/) by Contentsquare, a marketing and e-commerce analytics firm, and announced plans to integrate the two products. 

### Key features

- ✅ **Event autocapture** is a key differentiator between Heap and Mixpanel. Autocapture means product teams don't have to rely on engineers to instrument all events. Heap offers a visual editor for enables teams to tag on-page events for analysis.

- 📺 **Session replay** and heatmaps augment Heap's analytics features with qualitative insights, though it lacks the debugging tools typical of most replay tools.

- 🔁 **Managed ETL** to data warehouses, so you can export your Heap analytics data into a data warehouse and combine it with data from other sources.

### Who uses Heap?

Typical Heap users are:

- Non-technical product managers
- Marketing and design teams

> 

Reviewer: companies focused on user journeys and funnels could be another one here
